If we skip stuff like how the game build the actual screen, takes 
input from the mouse and keyboard and such, there are really 3 
steps that are interesting (4 if one add dungeon features but 
they don't really affect players or monsters directly (barrels do 
their attack at the time you hit it within the player update).

The three step (in order done) are:
1. process players
2. process monsters
3. process effects

In the player process the player will get his current action 
advanced one frame and if it reaches the attack frame, that is 
the frame where an attack will strike, that attack will be 
carried out. If an action reaches the end, the next one is prepared.
(Please note that this description is of occur brief and not 
complete, but gives what I think is the important information to 
you, my update will have this topic I post about here covered quite well).

In the monster process the game will typically figure out who is 
the target of the monster, then call the AI to decide action (if 
an action is already ongoing, no change is done, that is, a 
monster (or player) can't change or abort an ongoing action, so 
if an attack is started, it must be completed or aborted by an 
outside cause (like being attacked)). Then the current action is 
advanced (that is, the next frame is handled and if it is an 
attack, the game will check if it has reached the proper frame 
for the actual attack and if so actually do the attack.
For both monsters and players, the action may spawn an effect, 
this happens if a spell is cast as the action. The effect is then 
set up properly at the time it is spawned. Each effect has a 
specific setup code.

In the effect processing, each effect (basically spells or parts 
of spells) is updated (just as each effect as a startup code, it 
has an update code). he update will typically move the effect 
some distance (unless stationary), handle all type of specific 
tasks (some effect spawn additional effects as they go on), of 
course, there will be checks if it hit a wall or so. It will also 
check if it has a valid target in its location (that is, a player 
or monster) and if so, do an attack (including To Hit check first 
of course). Some effects are terminated upon hit, some are not, 
some are transformed into a splash attack and so on.

As for your specific question about the lightning spells. Chain 
lightning is just a bunch of lightning spells (actually there is 
a chain lightning effect that as its only task will spawn one 
lightning effect for each target within range and then it will 
terminate). The Nova effect will spawn some 90 or so bolts (each 
an effect) that will travel away form the caster  (resulting in 
the typical ring or bolts, it will only hit once on each target. 
SImilary Charged bolt is a moving bolt that hit once as well 
although it will be terminated when it hits as oposed to Nova 
that will continue and can thus hit more than one target.

The lightning effect seems to be the main focus of your question 
so lets explain it in more detail.

The lightning effect is a totally invisible effect that starts at 
the casters location and moves on in a straight line (with a 
speed value of 32). Each time it enters a new location, it will 
in that location spawn a stationary bolt. The bolt has a duration 
of [slvl/2]+6)/20 seconds or [slvl/2]+6 frames (since the game 
runs internally at 20 frames per second). A bolt from a monster 
always has the duration of 0.5 second or 10 frames and one from a 
trap 0.4 seconds or 8 frames. Obviously the bolt closest to the 
caster will disappear first as it was spawned first. The end 
effect is a visual stream of lighting that seems to move away 
form the caster. The lightning effect will be terminated as soon 
as it hits an obstacle.

The individual bolts are each an effect and as such are also 
updated one each frame. In each frame they will if there is a 
target in their location, try to hit it. This is done with a 
normal To Hit attempt using the To Hit formula for magical 
attacks in my Guide. If it hits, the damage (possibly adjusted 
for resistance) that it deals will be Rnd[clvl] + Rnd[2] + 2 if 
it originated form a player. If it originated form a monster, it 
will have deal damage in the range given in my Guide for the 
monster divided by 32 (a Red storm on normal difficulty will thus 
have a bolt that do 8/32 to 18/32 damage. Remember that the game 
keeps track of damage, life and mana with 6 extra bits of 
precision or 1/64th of a point). For traps the damage is (dlvl + 
Rnd[dlvl])/32. It is worth noticing that the actual damage of a 
bolt is determined at the time it is created, so a single bolt 
will do the same damage for all of its duration. Different bolts 
within a lightning spell can have different damage values though.
What does this mean? Well, assume the target stands still within 
the lightning spell from a player will attack (and make a 
separate to hit each time) [slvl/2]+6 times (once each frame) and 
each time if hit, do the damage stated above. Assume a level 10 
lightning spell, it will thus attack 11 times and can do anything 
from 0 (no hits) to 11*(clvl-1)+33 damage (minimum damage if it 
hits all times is 22. For a level 50 mage with level 20 spells, 
it can do as much as 16*(50-1)+48 or 832 point of damage if it 
hits all times. Assuming it hits all times, the average would be 
(832 + 16*2)/2=432 damage. Not bad.

A Red Storm on hell difficulty will similarly do (assuming it 
hits every time which is not that obvious) damage in the range 
from 10*36/32 to 10*78/32 (or 11.2 to 24.4 with an average of 
17.8). Not that impressing.
Please feel free to correct the above, especially the numbers, as 
I grabbed them and calculated rather quick. I might of course 
also have got something wrong and thus if anyone have experienced 
anything else, please tell me.

As is evident form the above, EACH attack will at the time it 
hits do the damage immediately and for EACH attack the game will 
check for such things as hit recovery and death (I would say that 
due to this, someone getting "killed" by a monster while 
using Mana Shield, will NOT take any more damage until the game 
reaches the Mana Shield effect and revives you, this might be a 
serious bug if it is true as it really means that if you are 
under heavy attack, you will never take more damage than your 
current life (I think it is always capped at -1 life for an 
individual attack but not sure, could be 0 or whatever value it 
ends up at as well) The reason for this is that if the target is 
dead, the attack would be aborted before it enters the to hit check). 

I hope this will clarify what you asked for. Currently the update 
of my Guide is completely done EXCEPT for the need of checking 
through the battle chapter one final time or two. So hopefully 
early next week. Although each spell is not explained with this 
detail, some of this and a lot more will be explained in the new 
battle chapter and the corrected and updated spell information in 
chapter 4 (it should now be more or less complete with all 
applicable damage, speed and duration data for all spells, both 
from players and monsters (as well as from traps).

I noticed an interesting discussion about the fireball some pages 
back. Although I must confess I don’t have the fireball spell 
mapped out in such detail as would be needed I can comment some. 
From what I remember, the fireball spell will if it hit, 
transform into splash mode and in the next frame, deal splash 
damage. It will for EACH of the 9 locations do a separate attack 
(and thus as evident from above do separate to hit checks for 
each one that will of course be totally unaffected of the initial 
hit (be it a wall or a monster or player). I still think the to 
hit formula would be the same as the effect should still be 
flagged as originating from the same player (or monster if 
advocate). Due to the way the spell seems to transform into 
splash damage rather than dealing it immediately, there might be 
some effects to it but I have found no obvious such ones. If none 
is done, the damage for the splash damage is IDENTICAL to what it 
was for the fireball itself (just as for the bolts above within a 
lightning spell, the actual damage is calculated upon initiating 
the fireball). I have never bothered looking at the actual parts 
that handles the movement and thus check for blocking features in 
the dungeon but I think Crystallion mentioned that before the 
splash damage attacks, it will first check if that location is 
"visible" from the caster, why this is made only the 
designers can tell of course. But it is well known that the 
splash damage will NOT be applied (or rather it will not try to 
hit) if the fireball (or the "visible check line of 
sight") passes over lava and a few other dungeon features 
(although over some it will apply, obviously the routine that 
check for visibility and the one that checks for the movement of 
the spell has some different set of conditions for what blocks).

Also, to avoid confusion over SC. Think of it as giving the 
attack an auto hit value of 100%. Don’t confuse or start 
thinking about AC or any such things (spells don’t use AC at all 
and are still affected by SC). And as said above, ALL (without 
exceptions as far as I can recall) attacks will do a to hit check 
(even if it is just to realize the target was SC and thus have an 
auto hit of 100% (this is technically handled by the game 
simply jumping over all other to hit check right into the next 
step which is damage and block stuff). There are only three 
different cases, melee, arrow and spell. Each has its own To Hit 
formula, bit there are no other cases or special cases (even 
charges use the same one (melee) although it alters the base To Hit to be 500%).
